**Question .** *For $X$ the number of heads on two throws of a coin,
find $E(X)$, $E(\frac1{1+X})$. Verify
$$E\left(\frac1{1+X}\right)\ne\frac{1}{1+E(X)}$$ Find
$\displaystyle\text{Var}(\frac1{1+X})$. *

By symmetry, $E(X)=1$.
$$E\left(\frac1{1+X}\right)=\sum_{x=0}^2\frac1{1+x}P(x)=1\times\frac14+\frac12\times\frac12+\frac13\times\frac14=\frac7{12}$$
Indeed
$$\frac{1}{1+E(X)}=\frac12\ne \frac7{12}=E\left(\frac1{1+X}\right)$$ To
find variance,
$$E\left(\left(\frac1{1+x}\right)^2\right)=1\times\frac14+\frac14\times\frac12+\frac19\times \frac14=\cdots$$
So
$$\text{Var}\left(\frac1{1+x}\right)=E\left(\left(\frac1{1+x}\right)^2\right)-\left(E\left(\frac1{1+X}\right)\right)^2=\cdots$$

**Question .** *A sample of two balls is selected at random and without
replacement from an urn containing five red, three blue and two white
balls. You win two pounds for each blue ball chosen and lose one pound
for each red ball. Let $X$ be your winnings. Write down the possible
values of $X$ and the corresponding probability mass function. Find your
expected profit. What is the probability that you lose more than a
pound, given that you do make a loss? **5 marks***

$X$ takes values $-2,-1,0,1,2,4$. $$\begin{aligned}
    P(X=-2)&=P(\{RR\})=\frac5{10}\times\frac49=\frac29\\
    P(X={-1})&=P(\{RW,WR\})=2\times\frac{5}{10}\times\frac29=\frac29\\
    P(X={0})&=P(\{WW\})=\frac{2}{10}\times\frac19=\frac1{45}\\
    P(X={1})&=P(\{RB,BR\})=2\times\frac{5}{10}\times\frac39=\frac13\\
    P(X={2})&=P(\{BW,WB\})=2\times\frac{2}{10}\times\frac39=\frac2{15}\\
    P(X={3})&=0\\
    P(X={2})&=P(\{BB\})=\frac{3}{10}\times\frac29=\frac1{15}\\\end{aligned}$$
Adding these up should give 1.
$$E(X)=-2\times\frac29-1\times\frac29+\frac13+2\times2{15}+4\times{4}{15}=\pounds 0.20$$
Finally,
$$P(X<-1\mid X<0)=P(X=-2\mid X<0)=\frac{P(X=-2)}{P(X<0)}=\frac{\frac29}{\frac29+\frac29}=\frac12$$

**Question .** *In a biochemical experiment, $n$ organisms are placed in
a nutrient medium and $X$, the number of organisms that survive for a
given period, is recorded. If
$$P(X = r) = \frac{2(r + 1)}{(n + 1)(n + 2)}$$ for $r = 0, \dots , n$
and is zero otherwise, calculate the probability that at most a
proportion $\alpha=\frac{k}n$ of the organisms survive. Deduce that for
large $n$, this probability is approximately $\alpha^2$. Find the
smallest value of $n$ for which the probability of there being at least
one survivor among the n organisms is at least $0.95$. **4 marks***

The probability that at most a proportion $\alpha=\frac{k}n$ survive is
$$\begin{aligned}
    P(X\le k)&=\sum_{r=0}^k P(X=r)\\
    &=\frac2{(n + 1)(n + 2)}\sum_{r=0}^k(r+1)\\
    &=\frac{(k+1)(k+2)}{(n + 1)(n + 2)}\\
    &=\frac{(n\alpha+1)(n\alpha+2)}{(n + 1)(n + 2)}\to \alpha^2\quad\text{as}\quad n\to\infty\end{aligned}$$

The smallest value of $n$ for which the probability of there being at
least one survivor among the n organisms is at least $0.95$ is
$$\begin{aligned}
    0.95&\le P(X\ge 1)\\
    &\le 1-P(X=0)\\
    P(X=0)&\le 0.05\\
    \frac{2}{(n+1)(n+2)}&\le \frac1{20}\\
    (n+1)(n+2)&\ge 40\\
    n&\ge 5\end{aligned}$$

**Question .** *Meteorologists are required to issue daily forecasts of
the probability of rainfall in a certain location. In an attempt to make
them more accountable, or to save money, it is proposed to link their
salary to their forecast performance. Performance is measured by scoring
each forecast probability $\hat{p}$ against the subsequent outcome
$$X=\begin{cases*}
        1& rain $p$\\
        0& no rain $(1-p)$
    \end{cases*}$$ It is proposed to define a the forecast score as
$$S = X \ln \hat{p} + (1 - X) \ln(1 - \hat{p})$$*

1.  If the true probability of rain is p, find the forecast value
    $\hat{p}$ that maximises the expected score. If forecasters receive
    salary bonuses when they score highly according to this rule, how
    should they act so as to maximise their salaries in the long run?

2.  In the West of Ireland, rain has occurred on 69% of all days in the
    last 50 years. In New South Wales, Australia, rain has occurred on
    24% of all days. Would it be appropriate to use this scoring rule to
    compare the performance of Irish and Australian forecasters?

**4 marks**

1.  $$\begin{aligned}
            E(S)&=\ln\hat{p}E(X)+\ln(1-\hat{p})\big(1-E(X)\big)\\
            \frac{\partial E(S)}{\partial \hat{p}}&=\frac{p}{\hat{p}}-\frac{1-p}{1-\hat{p}}
            \shortintertext{When this is zero,}
            \hat{p}&=p
        \end{aligned}$$

2.  The score $S$ is symmetric for $\hat{p}$ and $1-\hat{p}$. But
    $1-0.24\ne 0.69$, so it still isn't quite fair.
